The second component of a data model is
a set of operations that can be performed
on the data.
And in this module,
we'll discuss the operations without
considering the bigness aspect.
In course three,
we'll come back to the issue of performing
these operations when the data is large.
Now,operations specified
the methods to manipulate the data.
SInce different data models are typically
associated with different structures,
the operations on them will be different.
But some types of operations are usually
performed across all data models.
We'll describe a few of them here.
One common operation extract a part of
a collection based on the condition.
In the example here,
we have a set of records and
we're looking for a sub set that
satisfies the condition that
the fifth field has a value
greater than 100,000.
The only one record
satisfies this requirement.
Note that we called this operation
subsetting rather loosely.
Depending on the context,
it's also called selection or filtering.
The next common operation is retrieving
a part of a structure that is specified.
In this case,
we specify that we are interested
in just the first two fields
of a collection off records.
But this produces a new collection of
records which has only these fields.
This operation like before has many names.
The most dominant name is projection.
In the next module, we'll see several
versions of this operation for
different data models.
The next two operations are about
combining two collections
into a larger one.
The term combine may be
interpreted in various ways.
The most straightforward
of them is said union.
The assumption behind the union operation
is that the two collections
involved have the same structure.
In other words, if one collection has
four fields and another has 14 fields, or
if one has four fields on people and
the dates of birth, and the other has four
things about countries and their capitols,
they cannot be combined through union.
In the example here,
their two collections have three and
two records, respectively, with one
record that's common between them.
The green one.
The result collection has four record,
because duplicates are disallowed
because it's a set operation.
There is indeed another version of
union where duplicates are allowed and
will produce five records instead of four.
The second kind of combining,
called a Join, can be done when
the two collections have different data
content but have some common elements.
In the example shown,
the first field is the common element
between the two collections on the left.
In this kind of data combination
there are two stages.
First, for each data item think
of a record of collection one,
one finds a set of matching
data items in collection two.
Thus, the first records of
the two collections match
based on the first field.
In the second phase of the operation,
all fields of the matching
record pairs are put together.
In the first record of the result
collection shown on the right,
one gets the first four fields
on the first collection and
the remaining two fields
from the second collection.
Now in this one example, we found one pair
of matching records from the collections.
In general, one would find more
than one matching record pairs.
As you can see,
this operation is more complex and
can be very expensive when the size
of the true collections are large.